# Conclusion

Water quality continues to deteriorate with increasing population density which heightens the pressure on existing water resources and sanitation infrastructure. Its impacts on health, economic development and ecosystems are far-reaching. A multi-pronged water quality monitoring strategy is the need of the hour to address this challenge and undertake effective mitigation measures.

The design of a reliable and robust Water Quality Monitoring System \(WQMS\) beyond initial benchmarking is particularly useful to assess results of \(planned and ongoing\) interventions to mitigate pollution load entering the river atdifferent stretches. In the context of long-term sustainable rejuvenation of any river basin, the WQMS would be expected to yield reliable and sufficient data to assess effectiveness of interventions to mitigate pollution, take corrective measures and guide future action. Consistency and trustworthiness of results and approach are thus crucial. The monitoring protocol should be a hybrid approach; whereby different modes of measurement are used with a definite purpose for each. Once the objective of each monitoring exercise is clear, the most effective approach can be selected from laboratory-based testing, satellite imagery, stationary sensors or mobilesensing technique. The different datasets should be put side by side to compare and complement in order to create a complete picture of river health. Water-to-Cloud system can form an integral part of this multi-pronged water quality monitoring program. With the dipping costs of sensing technologies, a shift to sensor-based monitoring systems is inevitable and has already begun in some developed nations. Reliance on technology and automation at various steps in data collection, processing, analysis and dissemination make it easier to scale up. The availability of visualized and analyzed data enables decision makers to understand and act upon it in a timely manner.

A judicious and surgical use of the Water-to-Cloud system can fill the gaps in the currentwater quality monitoring program, act as a decision support system for policymakers, and invoke public participation in regulation of water quality. This is, however, only an addition to the repertoire of tools to monitor water quality available with the government, CPCB, scientists and practitioners. Ultimately, the corrective measures taken, regulatory compliance enforced and policy changes implemented using such data help in making progress towards achieving the overarching objective of rejuvenation of any river.

