# The Way Forward

Having collected, analyzed and studied water quality data from rivers and drains over the last three years, the study tested the feasibility of an innovative technique for monitoring in the Indian context through this grant. The possibility of getting newer information about pollution in an area and its potential cause was also studied. The next logical step was to customize such analysis for the needs of various stakeholders for them to act upon it.

Through an additional grant from the Tata Centre for Development at UChicago, the study began working towards simplifying reporting of technical data through a macro level understanding of any water body. The Water Quality Index creation was a step in this direction making it easy for laypersons to relate to it. With increased public awareness and civil society interest, the hope is to mainstream water quality issues. Working with IITs and other reputed academic partners, we intend to create a common vocabulary for universal acceptance of data and analysis.

The initial results from the machine learning models applied to water quality data are encouraging. With additional input data from our monitoring exercise as well as from other sources,these models will be further refined with the goalof making data available at scale. As of August 2019, we have collected 325,927 data points from 252 boat sorties at 11 sites. With more data and improved ML models, the water sector will be revolutionized.

Since early 2018, the W2C approach was discussed with the Central Pollution Control Board, National Green Tribunal \(NGT\) committee members for river pollution, Delhi Pollution Control Committee, National Mission for Clean Ganga \(NMCG\) and Ministry of Jal Shakti. There is concurrence on the need to make sense of data being collected and utilize it in decision making. A willingness to disseminate data in the form of visualizations such as heatmaps for ease of understanding has been a welcome shift in outlook. The CPCB has, in fact, now created a color-coded, geospatial map based dashboard similar to Water-to-Cloud. The next step is to encourage agencies to share data between departments and with the civil society for increased transparency and accountability.

Various stakeholders have also come together to adopt a systems thinking approach to solving river pollution challenges holistically. The project has set up a Knowledge Management Taskforce as part of a Multi-Stakeholder Platform for Hindon Basin and Ganga Tributary Management by the Uttar Pradesh government on the Public- Private Partnership \(PPP\) model. 2030 Water Resources Group at World Bank, India-EU Water partnership, State Mission for Clean Ganga and and Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board \(UPPCB\) are some of the other partners to join hands. The project attempts to drive down the point that everyone is part of the problem \(albeit to varying degrees\) and hence, everyone should be involved in its solution with each stakeholder voluntarily setting targets towards pollution reduction in aligment with the overall vision. W2C will provide unbiased, authentic data for all players to base their decisions on.

Inter-comparison of data from different rivers has facilitated an understanding of pollution effects atvarious places and the possible linkages between urbanization, industrialization, impact on health and aquatic life, livelihoods and ecology with river water pollution. A study on socio-economic impact of river water pollution has been commissioned with National Council of Applied Economic Research. We held a number of consultations towards co-learning and knowledge sharing.

The vision is to leverage technological advancements to simplify and speed up data collection while automating data dissemination and analysis to facilitate collaborations towards interpreting and acting on the data for a water secure future

