# Site and Route Selection

Based on the objectives of the monitoring exercise, the exact locations for measurement are chosen on a river. This may include an urbanized area to study the effect of domestic waste on the river or an industrial area to understand the impact of illegal discharge of industrial waste into the river or both. At each location on the river, the preferred route for data collection is selected in consultation with local authorities and ground staff. This route is marked to include all point and non-point sources of pollution entering the river including domestic waste water drain outlets, industrial outlet points, solid waste dumping sites and centres of domestic or religious activities such as washing clothes, offering flowers, fruits and grains. This provides an overall picture of total waste water being discharged into the river. A boat ride is then taken along the chosen route to look for practical concerns of accessibility associated with the identified route such as low depth and excess algae, which may hinder boat maneuvering or cause sensors to entangle. This feedback helps decide the final route which is usually a zigzag path rather than a circular one, for better mapping. More data points are collected around a drainage point or around an industry to identify the spread of pollution from a point source.

In case of drains, where sensors cannot be carried around in a boat, these mobile sensors are dipped at pre-identified sampling points to obtain in-situ data in real time. Critical locations to be monitored along the drain are identified in consultation with the local authorities based on key water management questions they wish to address. This may include identification of insanitary toilets, source apportionment, analyzing trends in waste water generation in a town, etc. Locations which require a 24x7 monitoring are monitored using stationary sensors.

