# Unsafe for Drinking Sometimes

As seen from WQI graph, Godavari waters may not always match drinking water standards. Furthermore, when heavy metal analysis was carried out using an ICP-MS \(Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry\) instrument in laboratory, several parameters were found to be above the permissible limits in some months of the year. For Narsapur, the concentration of aluminium \(Al\), chromium \(Cr\), manganese \(Mn\), iron \(Fe\), nickel \(Ni\), copper \(Cu\), zinc \(Zn\), selenium \(Se\) and lead \(Pb\) is found to be above the permissible limit as per the Bureau of Indian Standards \(BIS 2014\). For Rajahmundry, the concentration of Al, Fe, Mn, Ni and Pb was found above the BIS limit. The data for heavy metals exceeding limits is available in appendix VIII. The collected samples indicate that Mn concentrations were higher than the permissible limits in one out of three cases observed in Narsapur. Fe values were above the BIS limits for about 20 percent of the samples in Rajahmundry and for about 69.5 percent of the samples in Narsapur. Similar alarming values were found for Cu and Pb.

High concentration of Mn in drinking water may cause neurodegenerative disorder and sideroblastic anaemia. Fe is an essential element for human body but excess of Fe i.e. &gt; 300ppb may cause hemochromatosis. At later stage, it may increase the risk of arthritis, cancer, liver problems, diabetes and heart failure. Similarly, Cu is also an essential element for metabolic process, immune system and formation of red blood cells in human body. However, high concentration of Cu in water may cause cancer and neurologicaldisorder and its deficiency might cause anaemiaor leukopenia. High concentration of Pb in drinking water might cause convulsions, major neurological damage and organ failure in young children.

