# Existing Water Quality Monitoring Scenario

The traditional water quality monitoring approach involves grab sampling, followed by transportation of samples to a laboratory where they are analyzed using scientific instruments and the results are produced in a couple of weeks. Critical dependence on laboratories and trained technical staff make it a resource intensive and time consuming approach. This approach is also prone to human error at each stage-sample collection, transportation and analysis. Lack of infrastructure, financial resources or institutional and technical capacities to implement this approach could lead to scarce, unreliable or unsystematic data on water quality. Hence this approach, although robust, may not provide holistic information on the health of a river. To illustrate, Central Pollution Control Board \(CPCB\) is the national agency responsible for monitoring river water quality in India. CPCB collects data once a month via State Pollution Control Boards’ staff at 35 stations manually on Godavari, India’s second longest river after Ganga. Godavari flows for 1465km from its starting point before emptying into the Bay of Bengal. This implies, currently, only one data point is being collected by the government every 42km approximately which restricts the capacity to draw any meaningful conclusions on water health. Additionally, when such data is not supplemented with metadata on the exact location of data collection, time of the day, etc., usability of such data for practical applications may be further restricted.

