# The Need for High Resolution Mapping

High frequency spatial and temporal water quality data will help governments, health experts, and other decision makers make choices for water usage based on near real-time data and ensure regulatory compliance. This can also be used to develop new and innovative policies and aid in better enforcement of those. To study the effects of multiple polluting factors, it is essential to have access to data from continuous measurements.

Alternatives to laboratory testing involve stationary or mobile sensors providing data in real time, usage of satellite imagery or usage of water kits in the field. While satellites allow for high spatial resolution and easy scalability, they are restricted to measuring only a few optical parameters. Also, they need clear sky for generating accurate values. Governing equations have to be created and tested. Water kits are low-cost alternatives but do not provide accurate results as of now. Owing to each individual sample test, this method can be slow and cumbersome. Real-time sensors, on the other hand, provide quick and easy access to data. With the dipping costs of sensing technology, it has become an effective medium to collect continuous water quality data, minimizing the dependence on laboratories and human resources. Stationary sensors allow for continuous monitoring at a single location but regular maintenance and calibration may be a hassle due to accessibility issues. Since these can only be installed at a limited number of sites, spatial variation in pollution is also not monitored. Geo- tagged, time-stamped mobile sensors can be used to collect such data over a given area at high spatial resolutions. These can identify pollution hotspots as well as provide data on violators and efficacy of government sanitation interventions. Although one may miss out on some events that stationary sensors could have noticed, taking around these sensors multiple times ensures that regular events are not missed out. Availability of hundreds of data points in just a few hours makes the incremental cost of collecting each data point negligible. Sharing a set of sensors between various sites further keeps costs in check. Water- to-Cloud is one such approach leveraging sensor technology.

