# Appendix V: Water Quality Parameters

**pH**  
Based on the CPCB guidelines, the range of pH for surface water should be between 6.5 and 8.5.The pH exceeding the range might affect aquatic life, especially the adult fishes, as it may cause damage to the outer part including gills and eyes. However, alkaline pH might also affect ammonia concentration in river water. The low pH &lt;6.5 could influence the growth of invasive aquatic species of planktons and disappearance of fishes such as smallmouth bass. If the pH goes &lt;5, it is unsuitablefor aquatic animals and increases the solubility of trace elements such as Aluminium \(Al\) in the soil close to the bank. High Al and other trace elements might restrict the growth and once accumulated can inter into the human food chain. In acidic condition the Calcium \(Ca\) concentration is found tobe low which restricts the reproductive process in fish. If the water is used for drinking purpose, pH has an important effect on human metabolism and health as human body consists of 50–60 % water. The pH level of our body fluid should be in the range of 7–7.2. If pH is less than 5.3, it restricts theassimilation of vitamins or minerals.

**Electrical conductivity \(EC\)**  
Electrical conductivity \(EC\) is the amount of ions present in the water. It also indicates the amount of total dissolved solids and both of these are positively correlated i.e. more dissolved solid indicates more electrical conductivity. If the water is used for drinking and other domestic uses high EC cancause the laxative effect, however since drinking water is also a source of major ions in the human body and hence low EC might cause deficiency of ions. In agriculture, high EC might cause depositionof salt on the surface of soil which might reduce fertility and make the soil surface hard with low oxygen levels. In river ecosystems, high EC due to the presence of any organic chemical i.e. fuels,detergents, paints, solvents, etc. imparts objectionable and offensive tastes, odors and colors to fish andaquatic plants even when they are present in low concentrations. As noted earlier, dissolved ionsaffect the pH of water, which in turn may influence the health of aquatic species as discuss earlier.

**Dissolved Oxygen \(DO\)**  
An adequate supply of oxygen in dissolved form is essential for the survival of aquatic life. Hence, DO is considered as an indicator of aquatic health. Concentration of DO in surface water bodies depends on the temperature, turbulence of water, salinity, surface area and atmospheric pressure. DO inwater also gets influenced by the atmospheric dissolution and autotrophic and heterotrophicprocess which consume or produce O2 in water systems. Concentration of DO also determines the changes made by abiotic or biotic organisms and hence measurement of DO is essential. A rapid fall in the DO levels indicates high organic pollution in the river. The optimum value for good water qualityis 4 to 6 mg/l of DO, which ensures healthy aquatic life in a water body.

**Bio-chemical oxygen demand \(BOD\)**  
BOD is a measure of determining the requirement of oxygen needed by the aerobic micro- organism to stabilize the household and industrial wastes. To stabilize these organicwastes the minimum DO level should be 2-7 mg/L then only the BOD can be estimated in Laboratory condition at fixed temperature i.e. 20 °C for 5 days. High BOD indicatesrapid fall in DO with potential threat on aquatic biodiversity. A major reason for high BOD might be the high levels of organic pollution, caused usually by poorly treated waste water or highnitrate levels, which trigger high plant growth. For drinking water BOD should not exceed 6 mg/L however BOD &gt; 3mg/L is not found feasible for the growth and survival of fish and other aquatic life.

**Chemical oxygen demand \(COD\)**  
Chemical oxygen demand \(COD\) is the amount of oxygen utilized for chemical oxidation of organic waste to inorganic end products. It is an indicative measure of the amount of oxidizable organic pollutant in water. Similar to BOD high COD is an indicator of high organic material and consumption of high DO to stabilize it resulting rapid depletion in DO level. A reduction in DO can lead to anaerobic conditions, which are harmful to aquatic life forms. The COD test is often used as an alternative to BOD due to shorter length of testing time. Hence COD values can be used to estimate the BOD and reduce the time.

**Tryptophan**  
Organic matter in the fresh water consists of plant materials including both fulvic and humic substances. The organic matter also has an active microbial community which consumes DO resulting into increase in the BOD concentration in water. The protein in the cell wall of thesemicrobes has similar fluoresces like amino acids i.e. “Tryptophan” and hence tryptophan like fluorescence is used to measure the microbial health, fecal coliform concentrationand BOD of surface water.

**Colored Dissolved Organic Matter \(CDOM\)**  
CDOM are a mixture of colored organic compounds essential for the biochemical cycle in the freshwater. These are also called yellow substances. They control the nutrient availability, light penetration and ecosystem productivity. High CDOM inhibits the growth of phytoplankton resulting in decrease in DO. Pure water absorbs the long wavelength red light whereas CDOM absorbs theshort wavelength light ranging from blue to UV. So the water with no/less CDOM has blue color.CDOM represents the large proportion of dissolved total organic matter including terrestrially derived humic and fulvic acids. Variations in CDOM are a result of natural processes including changes inthe amount and frequency of precipitation, human activities such as logging, agriculture, effluent discharge, and wetland drainage can affect CDOM levels in fresh water systems.

**Chlorophyll-a**  
Chlorophyll-a is the photosynthetic pigment responsible for the green color of the plant leaves and algal biomass. The concentration of Chlorophyll-a directly indicates the amount of photosynthetic community or algae in the water. Existence of chlorophyll-a concentration in phytoplanktonand the phytoplankton spectra reflectance is related to the optical activity of the pigment, thecomposition and appearance of the algal cells. Chlorophyll, in various forms, is bound within the living cells of phytoplankton found in surface water and accounts for 1-2 percent of dry weight of planktonic algae. Chlorophyll is an important pigment in marine and freshwater algal species and has always been used as an indicator for phytoplankton biomass as well as bio-production calculation in water bodies.

